It’s Official: We’re Out of Things to Talk About
Isolation has been one long conversation, and we’ve reached the end of it. So, what’s next?!

Drew Magary

Photo: Johner Images/Getty Images
How am I doing? Oh, I’m the same as I was last time you saw me here on this website. Isolated but comfortable. Bored but patient. Hopeful only when I don’t read the news. I got nothing to say to you, and I doubt you have much to say back.

I have been told over and over again — by brands, by celebrities FaceTiming from tastefully appointed kitchens, by viral Facebook postings — that we are still together even if we are apart, and that now is a good time to turn inward, to not push things, and to become reacquainted with those who are closest to you.

But my family and I did all that shit last month, and guess what? WE’RE FUCKING BORED AGAIN. I am reacquainted with everyone 100 times over now. So, what do I even talk about on these seemingly mandatory Zoom get-togethers with friends and extended family?

Because I’m sick of telling people, “We’re fine.” That’s true in the physical sense — my family is both healthy and practicing responsible sanitary habits. But, of course, “fine” is a placeholder word. It’s the new meh. It’s a word people use when they have nothing to say but think they need to say something anyway. I’m sick of talking about myself. I’m sick of talking about the virus. I’m sick of talking about the fucking weather. I can’t believe I’m talking about the weather MORE than I used to, and yet here I am.

Here are a few tips right now on how to stay connected to people who are important to you, while also giving them, and yourself, the dose of oxygen you feel like you SHOULD be getting anytime you meet up in the cloud.

Not every call is a party. You don’t have to stay in the Zoom chat for an hour. It can be five minutes. The act of seeing each other’s faces is usually the main point, so once you’ve accomplished that (and you can make it plain that this was your primary goal), you’re freed from all the “How are YOU doing?” song and dance that never goes anywhere interesting.
Talk about Outer Banks. I won’t lie. The scene in Netflix’s delightfully trashy teen soap where they kiss on the pier was pretty cool. I tried to play it off like I wasn’t paying attention when my daughter and wife were binge-watching it. But John B and Sarah were clearly meant to be together. I’ll assume nothing gets in between them in later episodes.
Play Jeopardy! Every week I do a trivia night with my former Deadspin colleagues. Last week, Lauren Theisen figured out a way to turn that call into a full-fledged round of Jeopardy. It was AMAZING. I could have played Jeopardy for another six hours. We didn’t talk about ourselves at all, because we were far too busy trying to beat the shit out of each other in the realm of sports knowledge. You can make your own game here. Ain’t that some shit? Frankly this whole column should have just been about virtual Jeopardy.
Talk shit about the LAST person you called. They’re not on the call anymore! They won’t know! LOSERS.
Be drunk. I don’t drink anymore, but whoa hey look at that, there’s a weed stash right nearby. Useful! Whatever your everyday vice is, indulge in it before you get on the line. You’re probably doing this already, but perhaps you’ve made the critical error of getting in touch with your cousin-in-law at 10:00 on a Sunday morning, dead sober. Avoid that. You don’t go to a wedding sober, now do you? Get lubed up, and then…
DANCE.